
Assume that during testing of your program on a scalar architecture, you found that the execution time is too high, and you have to optimize it. You suppose that the following extracts significantly impact the execution time of your program.

### Tasks

- Apply strength reduction.
- State under which circumstances the transformation should be applied (e.g. if the cost of performing two additions is less than one multiplication).
- After you have applied strength reduction, compare the assembly code of the original snippets with your transformation. Investigate how the compiler (`gcc`) optimizes the snippets when using `-O3` and whether the compiler uses your transformation or applies another optimization on top of it. You can use [Compiler Explorer](https://godbolt.org/) to carry out this task. The given examples are already available at https://godbolt.org/z/NxEBrD. Note that you can easily navigate to the assembler code for a given input source line by right-clicking, but be aware that the source for one line might be distributed among interleaved instructions.



**a)** `c1` is of type `unsigned`:
```C
unsigned c2 = 32 * c1;
```

The multiplication can be replaced by a shift, as `32 = 2^5`:
```C
unsigned c2 = c1 << 5;
```
This transformation should be applied if the cost of performing a shift is less than the cost of performing a multiplication, which is the case on most architectures.


**b)** `c1` is of type `unsigned`:
```C
unsigned c2 = 15 * c1;
```

The multiplication can be replaced by a shift and a negation, as `15 = 16 - 1 = 2^4 - 1`:
```C
unsigned c2 = (c1 << 4) - c1;
```
This transformation should be applied if the cost of performing a shift and a negation is less than the cost of performing a multiplication, which should still be the case on most architectures.


**c)** `c1` is of type `unsigned`:
```C
unsigned c2 = 96 * c1;
```
_Hint_: use shift(s) and addition(s) to replace the multiplication

The multiplication can be replaced by a shift and an addition, as `96 = 64 + 32 = 2^6 + 2^5`:
```C
unsigned c2 = c1 << 6 + c1 << 5;
```
This transformation should be applied if the cost of performing a shift and an addition is less than the cost of performing a multiplication, which should still be the case on most architectures.


**d)** `c1` is of type `unsigned`:
```C
unsigned c2 = 0.125 * c1;
```

The division can be replaced by a shift, as `0.125 = 1/8 = 2^-3`:
```C
unsigned c2 = c1 >> 3;
```
This transformation should be applied if the cost of performing a shift is less than the cost of performing a division, which is the case on most architectures.


**e)** `a` is of type `unsigned *`:
```C
unsigned sum_fifth = 0;

for (int i = 0; i < N / 5; ++i) {
    sum_fifth += a[5 * i];
}
```
Here the first rule of the strength reductions from the slides (6) can be applied:
```C
unsigned sum_fifth = 0;

int t = 0;
for (int i = 0; i < N / 5; ++i) {
    sum_fifth += a[t];
    t += 5;
}
```
Here we exchange one multiplication per iteration with one addition and the cost of having antoher variable `t`. This should still be pretty beneficial, even for small values of `N`.

**f)** `a` is of type `double *`:
```C
for (int i = 0; i < N; ++i) {
    a[i] += i / 5.3;
}
```
Rule 1 of the strength reductions from the slides (6) can also be applied here, as i / 5.3 can be expressed as i * (1 / 5.3):
```C
double t = 0;
double c = 1 / 5.3;
for (int i = 0; i < N; ++i) {
    a[i] += t;
    t += c;
}
```
Same as above, but we need to do the division once. It's still beneficial.

**g)** `c1` is of type `float`:
```C
float c2 = -1 * c1;
```
_Hint_: Inquire how IEEE 754 single-precision floating-point numbers are represented in memory.

To negate an IEEE float the sign bit needs to be flipped. This can be done by XORing most significant bit with 1:
```C
float c2 = (int)c1 ^ 0x80000000; // hex for 1000 ... 0000
```
As XORing is a very cheap operation, this will be pretty beneficial. 

---

All trivial strength reductions where there is a multiplication by an uint (a,b,c), the compiler with -O3 will do the same I did.
For the multiplication with 0.125 the compiler does no strength reduction.
The first loop (e) the compiler does the same as I did.
For the second loop (f) it looks like the compiler does not do any strength reduction. 
For the last loop (g) the compiler directly uses the XOR operation to negate the float. This doesn't happen in my code. I'm not sure if thats possible in plain C.

